[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Jill
Weisenthal [music]
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, it's uh January 28th. I think our
new mayor in here in New York City, I
mean, he hasn't done much, but the
snowstorm seemed to go fairly well. Not
too many big disruptions.
>> I wasn't here, but you were able to walk
around, get out of your apartment.
>> There have been several mayors whose
like entire reputation failed because
they couldn't handle a snowstorm and so
he seems to have passed the first test.
So, I
>> it feels like a low bar for New York
mayors. I got to say
>> my guess is if we looked at uh I agree
it is a low bar but on the other hand
it's like okay first big test of the new
administration seems to be doing well. I
don't think however ultimately the Zoran
Donni administration will be judged on
snow removal like this is not going to
be how history probably remembers how
well
>> no and he certainly wasn't elected on
his snow removal capabilities. Although
I did see the videos of him, you know,
getting his shovel out and
>> he's so good at like retail politics.
Like that was like such he was so good
at that. Yeah.
>> But speaking of tests, I mean there are
bigger tests coming up, right? Mostly
concentrated in the economic policies
here,
>> right? I think we know like sort of and
of course we talked to him but like the
affordability question in New York City
clearly central one of the if the most
central topic in the campaign
>> and what I would say is that the very
most not all of them but at least a
handful of the ideas that he has
proposed are the types of ideas that
like economists hate them right so
especially anything where the government
is intervening in rent the idea of like
I there might not be a more hated idea
among economists than anything that
smacks rent control or anything like
that.
>> Right? So I am not very knowledgeable
when it comes to actual economic theory
and how it's developed over time. But
one thing I do know is that you know the
sort of forerunner or ancestor of a lot
of traditional economic theory that we
see today like neocclassical economic
theory
>> Adam Smith right talking about like the
free hand of the market
>> and how if the market is functioning
like everything should be fine right
>> yeah and and I think like economists
even like you know almost all but the
most sort of true hardcore less afair
economists
would say that there are areas that you
know they call market failure, right?
There are certain situations in which
maybe we can't expect markets to do the
job. Maybe they'd say like, "Oh, it
really doesn't make sense to have like
private fire departments for example."
Although some people actually do propose
private fire departments, but yeah, you
know, even the most sort of like true
believers sort of liberal or
neocclassical economics, they're like,
"Oh yeah, well there are market
failures,
>> right? In which case the government
should
>> and then there is a role but only in
failure that it unless you that you like
define some area it's like okay there is
a reason why markets don't work for this
particular area but that after then
sandboxing a few of those things then
it's like okay as much as possible you
just want to you want to let them
>> out don't interfere
>> let the price signals do their work.
>> Yeah. So this has become I guess the
orthodoxy.
>> Yeah. And Mumani is very much in the
>> the heterodox.
>> The heterodox. Yeah. That's a word that
always comes up when people are talking
about well when economists are talking
about policies that they don't like.
>> That's right. [laughter]
That's right. It's a euphemism for
policies that they they're like, "Oh,
no. At least a handful of people wear
that badgely."
>> But like these history, how did they
become the orthodoxy, etc., right? Like
it's not like the law of gravity, right?
Or that the earth is round, which are
orthodox ideas for a good reason. There
are some people who don't believe that
the earth is round, but they're like I
think we it's pretty good. We have good
reason to believe it. And there the
people who don't believe that the earth
is round, they're not heterodox, they're
cranks,
>> right? Right. Like that's like there's
sort of a difference. Those are cranks.
And so, but where did these orthodoxies
emerge from? How did some ideas get
shunted into the category of heterodoxy
or whatever?
>> And how did they evolve?
>> I have no idea. Like I mean, I've read a
little bit about the past, but uh this
is not much I don't know much about
this.
>> We should talk about it. We should,
especially because I our new mayor may
in fact pursue some heterodox ideas
about economic management. Anyway, I'm
very excited to say we really do have
the perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with Johnny Modude. He is a
professor of economics at Sarah Lawrence
College, also a board member of the law
and political economy collective and
he's written a lot about these topics
including sort of the intellectual
history of some of these economic ideas.
So, uh, Jamie, thank you so much for
coming on Oblad. Thank you so much and
Tracy.
>> What kind of stuff are you teaching the
kids at Sarah Lawrence these days?
>> So the interesting thing is I teach
introduction to economic theory and
policy which is a year-long lecture and
that actually deals with some of these
central questions markets money the
monetary system and so on and I actually
teach econometrics.
>> When you say actually it's because like
people don't expect the sort of
unorthodox thinker to like actually
[laughter] do the numbers the technical
stuff. So it's interesting that you
posed that way because one of the things
that I do teach in econ econometrics is
method
>> like you know like when you're it's not
just about number crunching but where do
you get the numbers from?
>> Yeah. And so like weaving in these
questions of method as we're trying to
understand social and economic reality
is it makes for
a solid training in economics and you
know so those questions of method woven
into the construction of theory. Yeah.
That kind of informs the way I teach
>> and why that matters not just as kind of
a an intellectual exercise but why that
matters for practical issues like what
you what you guys were talking about. So
truly the perfect guest. Maybe just to
begin with, we could perhaps define our
terms a little bit. You know, Joe and I
gave a probably terrible summary of
neocclassical economic thought, but in
your mind, what is the orthodoxy?
>> So the orthodoxy is neocclassical
economics. It comes from an intellectual
tradition which
so if I may differ a little bit with
what you said about Adam Smith
>> Adam Smith is not the forerunner of
neocclassical economics the expression
invisible hand in fact I have my
students do this experiment every time
because it's an 800page book the wealth
of nations how many times does the
expression invisible hand appear there
once so the point here is that there
there was an older idea of what markets
and of capitalism
are and that gets revived again in the
1920s and 30s and I'll talk about that
later but that older idea which is
called classical political economy did
not make any assumptions about human
behavior that human beings are
inherently rational that markets behave
in this optimal manner at full
employment that would be neocclassical
economics right that knowledge is more
or less perfect there was none of that
>> you talk into the classical economics
prior to neocclassical. Exactly. Or talk
what years and what thinkers are we
talking about here.
>> So let you know we could just talk about
Adam Smith.
>> Okay. Oh yeah. Great.
>> To some extent David Ricardo, Karl Marx,
the physiocrats. I mean so you had a
range of authors in a wide range you
know who ideologically not necessarily
on the same page but they had a vision
of capitalism which so the original name
of economics was political econ economy
and that meant that you you cannot
really talk about economic questions
without thinking simultaneously about
politics and many of these folks were
actually trained in law so the question
of law's role in structuring the
economy. This kind of lurks in that
intellectual tradition. And one of the
implications was that the economy is not
some natural transhistorical
institution or thing but is profoundly a
product of history. And I think that's
where the big split arises because if
you teach or if you study neocclassical
economics, it is taught in a way by
which the economy is treated as
something eternal as something almost in
naturalistic terms and therefore
>> like gravity.
>> Like gravity,
>> the economy is always there.
>> Exactly. But but but also like the
rational individual general equilibrium
theory all of these things are
supposedly just happen. And in that
sense this idea of less affair that the
economy is fundamentally prepolitical
that it arises before politics rather
like the kernel of a walnut in which the
walnut which is the shell is if you
think is you know constitutional law or
politics or law that e emanates from
politics that would enase this thing
called the economy and only under
extreme sense of this neocclassical
economics if there is quote unquote
market failure then the state can step
in a little bit to do this that or the
other but fundamentally leave the market
be and you're familiar with this
argument this idea
>> is not really there in Smith
>> and one of the things that people
sometimes get surprised about and I
always tell this to my students is read
his chapter on wages in the wealth of
nations and he says very clearly that
there is a difference in power between
those who own property and workers who
don't own property so this idea that The
market is sort of this place where
equals meet to create contracts. That
was not in Smith. It was not in Ricardo.
And of course, you know, that was not
there in Marx. But people, if you evoke
Marx, then people often say, well, you
talk about socialism. Well, but Smith
was not a socialist.
>> What was his idea? Like what what what
was his contribution? Or I admit like
I'm like guilty to like, oh, Adam Smith,
Invisible Hand, the Butcher, they all
work together, blah blah blah. But I
have been told and I have heard that the
sort of caricature that we all have of
Smith is wrong. What was his project?
>> So I think the way to think about it is
you know just to sort of get out
something which I think is kind of
important which is institutions.
>> Okay. Now there have been many different
readings of Adam Smith and so I'll come
to that in a little bit. But just to get
it out there, when when you talk about
institutions, you're talking about the
system of implicit and explicit social
constraints within which we exist,
right? So we are having the spontaneous
conversation but in the context of a
building
>> uh which is subject to certain zoning
laws and so on. We may and you know in
in current zoning laws we cannot smoke
but we were
>> there are certain expectations involved
in
>> but those expectations are codified in a
kind of a legal framework right so
institutions the formal institution is
law and informal institutions are
cultural norms and notions of right and
wrong and justice and all this so Adam
Smith according to I think is a
convincing strain of thought was an
institutionalist he understood that Yes,
the sphere of private behavior, private
interactions, lesser affair actually
sits on a foundation
which is of human creation. The system
of property rights and the system, you
know, the system of you power relations
and all of that. So politics was already
there. It's not that the economy was
pre-political and those ideas if you
read Adam Smith his Glasgow University
lectures 17 you know that was before the
wealth of nations it's very clear that
he he's writing that but what happens is
the rise of neocclassical economics in
the late 19th century eviscerates that
history and it changes the story the
political goes out of a political
economy and it becomes economics so the
principles of economics and so then this
generation of economists trained to
think of the economy as completely
separate from politics
>> right
>> and that in the post-war period uh so
that leads to what is called the
Walrasian general equilibrium theory and
I'll be happy to explain that yeah
>> can I just ask I I have so many
questions already but what was the
environment that actually gave rise to
the neocclassical
>> so this is really interesting because
we're talking about the late 19th
century
And this is a time of enormous social
turmoil,
>> right?
>> So to think that an idealized view of
markets would arise when you know you've
got the Great Depression of the 1890s
>> and then it goes through World War I and
World War II.
>> Yeah. Yeah. But here's the funny thing
that happens in this tradition. So what
is interesting about American economics
is that the American economic
association is founded by
institutionalists but institutionalists
not of the neocclassical kind. They were
explicit. So they were trained these
these authors like um Richard T. Eli and
others they were trained in the German
historical school of economics and the
method of the German historical school
of economics was that theory has to be
constructed in dialogue with social
reality.
Web Duboce
trains in at Berlin
>> but as a sociologist and he brings that
method to the study of racial
inequalities in this country in which
he's constructing a theory of race and
class by looking at actually the the
living standards of black people in this
country. Right? So it's a particular
method that was not deductive but it was
inductive. It was engaging with social
reality. So what happens is that when
the AEA is constructed of American
economic association, these are
institutionalists of that kind and they
come to dominate American economics
right through the 1930s
informing many of these uh economists
and lawyers who who were part of
Roosevelt's brains trust. I mean many of
those folks were lawyers but you had
these folks who were trained in a way by
which they were absolutely opposed to
this idea that the economy is
prepolitical
>> right what happens in the 1940s
is the you know the war and then you had
the role and so Philip Morowski
discusses this in his book he's a
historian of economic thought uh machine
dreams in which he argues that economics
eventually becomes dominated ated by
mathematicians
and engineers who who kind of eviscerate
society and politics and history and
construct the economy as a machine
populated by cyborgs right
pre-programmed
>> perfectly rational
all knowing allseeing etc etc and that
way of conceptualizing economics
eclipses this older tradition and in so
doing becomes dominant in in the 1950s
and60s and in this way it was very much
a state project in the sense that these
folks were employed at institutions that
got a lot of money from the department
of defense. M
>> so there was a very sort of like an
intellectual framework is being
constructed about the economy
>> in which many of these authors were very
explicitly trying to model weapon
systems
>> input output that kind of thing and that
how do you optimize this input output
system that the flying plane how to
shoot it down etc. So the economy
becomes this engine and becomes
increasingly more and more
mathematically sophisticated but in so
doing divorced from social reality. In
the National Science Foundation convened
a symposium on the state of economics
teaching in the top graduate schools and
they were extremely concerned about what
was being taught. that led to uh the
commission on graduate education in
economics. It was a survey of the top
graduate programs in economics and the
article in question was published in the
journal of economic literature and what
and it was pretty dismal because it was
saying that these these students are
learning math econ but they cannot apply
this to social reality and the
conclusion was quite interesting. They
said the concern is that the profession
is training idiots savons. That was an
exact term in the JAL article.
>> It's not the worst thing that's ever
been said about economists.
>> Yeah, that's true. That's true.
>> So this issue of the way by which the
discipline itself has sort of captured
the narrative in which math becomes
rigor as opposed to history and society.
And so then government intervention and
non-intervention become the sort of
flash points of the fight. But it's a
false debate, I would argue.
[music]
Can we talk a little bit more about the
post-war environment coming out of the
1940s?
My impulse I feel like if I were there
it's like oh you know governments can be
absolute monsters right and
>> talking about the McCarthy
>> no I'm talking about the rise of dict
militaristic dictators like all around
the world like true like true the sort
of like monstrous creations and of
course the first half of the 20th
century was like characterized by the
rise of like
>> with strong industrial policy my impulse
like I think if I had been around in the
1940 I was like, "Oh, we need to like
come up with an economics that
constrains the state as much as possible
because we've just witnessed how the
state can be absolutely monstrous and
destructive." And of course, right
before that was the Great Depression,
etc. Like
>> I don't know. I I I would have I just in
my mind
>> I would have a lot of sympathy for that
view at the time.
>> Sure. Here's the thing though. So this I
discussed this in one of the chapters in
my book and I had a lot of fun writing
about this
>> is that if you look at post second world
war European reconstruction
>> it involved
it's not less affair not at all it
involved industrial and social policies
right the mobilization of central banks
and actually the US Congress had two
studies done on European central banks
role in mobilizing finance and credit to
promote industrial and social policies
you know the reconstruction building of
hospitals etc etc and the export
economies and France and Germany and so
on so you did have pretty strong state
>> but these were dem social social
democratic states and this is an
important point I mean the you know so
so for example the bank of France is
nationalized in 1945 or 444 and the
national credit council which is at the
core of the bof has in it different
constituents of French society, unions,
employers, farmers and so on who are
sort of involved in planning the
allocation of credit to different
sectors of society. Across the border in
Germany, you have the KFW which is a
public bank again with different
stakeholders including unions and they
are involved in sort of the economic and
social reconstruction through credit
allocation. But these were democratic
states you know sort of I hear you that
in the sense that for sure you can have
industrial policy of a type which is
consistent with authoritarianism.
>> Yeah.
>> And all of us would be opposed to
authoritarianism but there was
industrial policy of a social democratic
kind also and we have plenty of examples
of those just from post-war Europe.
>> So just to better understand maybe we
could apply some of the theory to
current economic policies. when you look
at Madani's agenda, you know, things
like [snorts] a freeze on rent or um I
think right now the hot topic is attacks
on billionaires,
>> right?
>> How does that fit into the intellectual
history of economics? And I guess how
heterodox is it versus the orthodoxy
that we've been talking about?
>> Well, I mean, it's a it's it's a it's a
big question in the sense that I can
answer it in two two ways. One is the
narrative that this is going to tank the
economy. So let's just talk about the
tax part. Let's just get that out of the
way. That this this small increase in
the billionaire tax is going to tank the
economy. And my responses, well, gez,
then capitalism would have been dead a
long time ago because the 16th amendment
would have killed American capitalism.
So that was
>> wait what's the uh oh is that the one
that gave the government the federal
government the ability to
>> well that was the 16th amendment really
legalized prog income taxes right and so
if you look at across the western world
you know like in the US tax rates were
actually much more progressive in as you
know in the 50s and 60s
>> other countries had this growth of more
progressive taxes Britain and France and
so on none of that led to the collapse
of capitalism and the
>> many people say those were the golden
ages of capitalism Okay. So the question
really is not the tax per se but what is
it being used for and right and so
that's that's a separate conversation
but is that necessarily is that contrary
to orthod orthodoxy and yes in a way it
is because it comes back to this idea
that analytically I mean every textbook
will tell you well you've got this
self-contained black box called the
economy which equilibrates at general
equilibrium the production possibility
frontier par optim mality all these sort
of aspects of orthodoxy. So any act of
state intervention into it will
automatically generate some negative
outcomes. Right? So from that standpoint
I I I would say that it is profoundly
opposed to the orthodoxy this way of
thinking about it. But if we think of
the orthodoxy as a touchstone or as a
gold standard then of course you would
say well these are outlandish ideas. But
if you don't fall into that then you
would say well yeah but this has been
done. So what is so weird about it?
>> Can we go back? I want to talk more
about the present tense, but we can't
just like jump over the war completely
without a you have you've
>> talked about reconstruction.
>> No, no, no. But uh sorry, I want to go
back to the war and not reconstruction.
Uh you're reading or you did read Wages
of Destruction,
>> right? Which is why I mentioned I mean
German industrial policy.
>> But it occurs to me there's something I
think is very interesting that I think
about it a lot and I'd love your take on
this. Like if we hear like someone is an
economist these days,
>> right?
>> You know, they come up with a bunch of
like big ideas, they have theories and
they run tests and write papers and try
to influence. But when you think of
like, okay, the economists in the
department of war in whatever country
was fighting at the time, etc. It seemed
like a more humble profession in the
sense like a lot of the jobs seem to
just be counting. Not even like advanced
mathematics per se, but the job seemed
to be a sort of like very like
>> the people who keep track of the
resources within the economy and those
were the economists which sounds to me
very different than the picture that we
would often get in our head today if you
hear that someone is an economist. Is
that fair?
>> Is that a fair understanding of history?
>> I'm not sure that I agree.
>> Okay, that's fine. Because I think that
I mean in some sense there's truth to
what you're saying because a lot of
these economists who were involved in
war planning
>> that's exactly what they were doing. I
mean you know yeah they were actually
but they were actually doing math
modeling. I mean the whole
mathematization
>> of post of post-war you know math econ I
mean all of that really came from like
sophisticated mathematical models. So it
did come from that. But I think maybe
what you might be getting at over here,
but you know, just tell me if this is
what you're trying to say. At least what
I'm hearing
>> is that this
>> notion that the economy is an engine and
the economist is like this technician
who's just like tinkering around with
things, right? And I think this idea
and and so that's how the economist is
kind of constructing this engine as
opposed to an economist who is actually
attempting to fix the engine but also
trying to see what the component parts
are built on. In other words, society
history.
>> I'm going to take what you said and make
it what I meant to say because I I do
I'm going to cheating.
>> Yeah, that's what I meant this. Oh,
that's exactly how I meant to put it.
Thank you for validating my perspective
on this.
>> Okay. And I think those reflect two very
rival methodologies. Okay.
>> So the I think that one of the things
that so often gets missed out in the in
the teaching of economics and then the
learning of economics is that the
students don't learn method. You know
they could say that I mean a textbook
should say okay this is neocclassical
economics. Here is a method that is used
and here is this alternative. Call it
whatever you like to. I generally don't
use hetrodox economics. I say critical
political economy or you know that kind
of thing. It employs a different method
>> and here's why it matters. Now if you
just do like spend a few chapters on
that that already sets the stage for an
intelligent conversation. But if you
don't do that and it's just that this is
economics then what happens is it it
kind of leaves out any possibility of
even understanding the world. Right? So
Chinese, the Chinese economic miracle,
the Japanese economic miracle, those are
seen as somehow
>> I don't know that they were cheating.
>> Right.
>> Right. This this notion that these
countries were cheating
>> as opposed to saying well they use no
they use industrial policy of a certain
kind. So did Sweden of a different kind
uh in the post-war period. And can we
learn something from that theoretically?
And what does that say about the
relationship between politics and
economics which is exactly where we
started out with and I think that's the
way the conversation should go.
>> Got it. Can you just remind me very
quickly but how does neocclassical
economics actually explain the fact that
we do have market failures right because
in theory if the market is perfectly
functioning and always generating um an
optimal outcome always at equilibrium
between supply and demand or whatever
they shouldn't be happening right and
yet throughout history we have market
failures all the time
>> so that's the way where I would say that
market failures don't actually exist
Because I mean think about one instance
of what is often characterized as market
failure. Pollution
>> right
>> now pollution is ubiquitous right I mean
any act of production involves inputs of
raw materials which are extracted from
somewhere then you've got a
physicochemical process out comes an
output and it could be an intangible
output. could be you know the output
from the your computer right and then
there's waste there's pollution so now
if pollution and waste are ubiquitous
and if market failures are ubiquitous
then they're not market failures
logically they are the legal design of
the property rights that enabled the
owner of the factory to actually dump
chemical waste or for Google to take
your and my private data Right. It's a
it's a that brings you straight back to
the fact that the social cost that
industry, you know, can inflict depends
on the legal design of industry. So
before the National Environmental Policy
Act of 69, industry had far greater
leeway to dump more chemical waste than
after that. So I would just say that
yeah I think we need to move away from
the this notion of market failure uh and
then you know so that's a usual debate
that well okay so you got market failure
then do we want state intervention or
not and I argue in the book that that's
a bit of like a family debate between
liberals and conservatives because both
sides agree that there's market failure
and then one side say well we should
probably not have state intervention and
the other side says the opposite. My
point is there are always social costs
and politics through the law is going to
be structuring the composition and level
of those costs and so I think that's
where the conversation I think should go
to. So it's a political decision about
which costs to minimize or avoid versus
an economic
>> I mean it's always been that and that's
where I think in that sense if you come
back to issues of affordability and such
I I would say that if you let housing
prices be whatever they are so that
people lose their homes that's as much a
political structure ring of real estate
as otherwise you see what I'm saying it
yeah so it's not any which way politics
is there the question is who's
benefiting and who's losing. This is I
think for me this is the question.
[music]
Okay. So there are some things where
markets work very well, right? You know,
if we want to have really good bagels,
then there's a good chance that like a
good way to get there is you have a lot
of bakery entrepreneurs. Absolutely. And
they're competing on price and quality
and so forth,
>> etc.
>> Sure.
>> But then they're going to emit waste. So
let's just go back to the pollution
example in the process and we say like
okay the market worked really well in
the creation of the bagel but we have
this problem which is that they're
creating they're creating waste that has
to be solved and even that's benign you
know it's like of course anyone is but
there's going to be some waste involved
even it's not the most polluting thing
so we need some sort of like okay so
then the neocclassical economics yeah
there's market failure this is why we
have we have to have a public the the
sanitation worker ers, right? Because
otherwise they'd all just be dumping it
out on the street. And so, okay, so we
have public sanitation workers. You
reframe this and you're like, no, market
failure isn't the right way to think
about it. It's endemic to production.
It's part of how market works. It's not
failure. What do we then do with this
information so that we know we no longer
conceive of these sort of like edge
cases of mostly markets work or
frequently markets can work, but then
you get market failures. You flip this
entire thing on the head and you're like
market failures are not a useful thing.
>> Okay, we accept that premise. Then what
do we do with that new we have this new
lens and then what do we see?
>> Some of those social costs would need to
be internalized. In other words, they
would as they always have been, right?
Throughout the history of capitalism,
again, so this is not just an arbitrary
statement. But if you look at throughout
the history of capitalism, this
Janisface nature of capitalist activity,
wealth creation on the one hand and
social costs on the other hand, and then
at some in various moments in time, some
of the social costs were extremely high
in terms of the rates charged on
something on the other. Manvy, Illinois,
1877, landmark Supreme Court case came
out of the Interstate Commerce Act
Commission which put caps on railroads
and on grain elevators because what was
happening was that the uh the farmers
were storing they were charging
extremely they were being charged
extremely high rates by grain storage
elevators and and train and railroads
and what was happening was the price for
food was rising. So the Illinois state
legislature put a cap on that went up to
the Supreme Court and so there was this
whole idea and the Supreme Court ruled
in favor of price caps on these rates
charge because they said well this is
this is of social importance. Food
should be affordable. There's a very
long history of this in American uh
constitutional history. That is
basically exemplifying the basic point
that at some points and in various
points some of these social costs were
deemed too high and then in some way
they would need they they had to either
be internalized or or you know maybe
smaller businesses could not internalize
some of these costs. Okay, give them
some kind of a tax credit.
>> Right?
>> You see what I'm saying? There's there's
intelligent ways of thinking about
public policy. So Mandani's policies
whatever they may be they may affect um
I don't know smaller businesses
differently from a larger ones. So the
ones that have less cash flow they can
get a tax credit as a write off right I
mean you can think about all of these
kinds of policies in then at least
that's the way I think about it in
practical terms.
>> I'm trying to think how to frame this
question and I probably won't get it
right but here goes. We've been doing a
lot of episodes on Venezuela recently
and so if I think about, you know, some
famous heterodox economic policy that
perhaps went kind of wrong, that would
be a good example
>> when you're thinking of designing actual
economic policy. If you're doing it
prioritizing
politics or on a political basis
>> and you don't have that sort of
scientific rational framework that is so
endemic in neocclassical thought
>> does that help you design policy? Is
that a useful framework for you?
>> I guess the question is what defines
science. M
>> so the way for example the institutional
economist that I was talking about the
way they designed policy was on the
basis of theory that was evidence-based
social reality historical reality court
cases you know this kind of thing um
neocclassical economics doesn't do
policy that way though or theory it's
deductive it assumes so it's
constructing this model on the basis of
no evidence so neocclassical economics
>> on the basis of a reality that does not
in fact exist.
>> Exactly. Thank you for putting it that
way because that already exemplifies the
problem which is that how on earth are
you designing a policy based on a theory
for which you have which has not been
subjected to any kind of theoretical you
know any kind of intellectual engagement
with reality in the wake of the
financial crisis of 2007208
when prominent neocclassical economists
were asked wait a second are you now
going to rethink your models because
this should not have happened per the
neocclassical framework. They said no
and I think that's the problem here
that policy is being designed in this
particular way on the basis of theory of
this nature. But
if you bring in a more engaged way of
thinking about policy
and politics then the nature of the
politics matters. I mean who who you
know is it an authoritarian state is it
a democratic state? So I don't like
authoritarianism.
>> Sure.
>> So I think
policy should reflect theory on the
basis of democratic principles in some
in a broad sense.
>> You know going back to the contemporary
debates about housing in New York City
right now and there are others who might
buy exactly what you're saying at the
conceptual lens
>> and they would say you know what is
completely correct about everything. The
problem is that existing politics have
made it too hard to build. The problem
is that existing politics have made it
so that we're paying too much for labor,
etc. The problem is that existing
landlords control have too much
influence and are constraining the
building of new uh that they like it
strikes me as there are many versions of
your framework that to take it to
specific policies that don't necessarily
lead to and therefore rent control is
okay. that you could say, look, there's
our current system is riven with
politics and that the way to engage
democratically and the way to think
about this is we need to liberalize the
the solution to affordability is getting
rid of some of these zoning laws, etc.
>> It seems to me like that you could agree
with sort of the your conceptualization
of some of these challenges and yet and
still arrive at very different outcomes
in terms of a policy response. So
>> in fact in fact I Zoron himself may even
agree with that because we know that he
is more liberal than say many on the
left when it comes to the role of
private capital for developing new
housing.
>> Okay. So my response is that if we this
is true first of all to concede I think
in any kind of a discussion you concede
what the other person is saying and this
is true uh about the sort of impediments
of current politics and power structures
this that and the other but that's
always been the case. It's always been
the case. And so like if if if we
thought of that as the supreme
impediment to actually making things
better, then we would have abandoned
society would have abandoned any
attempts to let's say have safer cars.
>> Sure.
>> Because the automobile industry fought
tooth and nail against seat belts for
decades making them safer. You know, the
whole design of cars. Uh so the point
here is it's not as though that
proposing a policy implies that you wave
a magic wand and it just happens. There
are going to be insuperable problems and
there's going to be impediments. Um but
that's always been the case. That
doesn't mean that you know you you
cannot lose track of the fact that lack
of affordability
>> Yeah. in this country and elsewhere in
the world has seriously eroded
democracy.
>> Yeah.
>> As we know and had has has fueled
authoritarian politics. There's a clear
relationship here between economic
insecurity and and authoritarianism
>> undeniably. Just to press further on
this, however, so one of the things that
the housing people love to say is that,
you know, there were rule there was a
rule change several years ago.
Ironically, it was under the Cuomo
administration. There was a rule change
that made it harder for landlords to
raise the rent of a rent stabilized
building after the tenant left. And then
so then the new tenant comes in, they
like can't move it up by much.
Meanwhile, we have inflation. And so we
have this effect, at least according to
many housing people, where a lot of
supply has been taken off the market
because they can't raise the rent. The
law prevents them from raising the rent
and their maintenance costs have gone up
and so like these are no longer
economical to run
>> now. Again, like my point is not they're
right, they're wrong, whatever. My point
is that all of this could be true and
all of this framework can be very
helpful, but it doesn't necessarily
lead to the conclusion that Zoron is
right to to take a stronger line on what
you can just do by fiat in terms of
price constraints.
>> Well, I you know, yeah, it does. I mean,
>> I think I would disagree.
>> Okay, great. Because I think that if by
that logic then we shouldn't have ever
done anything anyways right so we could
have you know so so for example
opposition I mean so like sort of moving
this sort of the discussion a little bit
away from housing but let's say to
taxation right we were talking about
taxation earlier on there was massive
opposition during the guilded age
>> that if you have progressive taxation if
you even have the 16th amendment this is
going to destroy the whole society and
so the struggles in that guilded age
period period which ultimately led to
the 16th amendment exemplifies the point
that yeah I mean there are going to be
there is going to be opposition.
>> Sorry just well then what is the
limiting principle or maybe you said
okay there are different methods to to
doing economics and you say the new
classical one method and other people
have other methods. How do we know like
okay let's say we want to impose more
stringent caps on how much you can raise
rent like we don't know like it could go
well and it could go bad right I assume
you would agree that there are ways to
do this very badly
>> yeah of course
>> so what are the methods that we could
employ that the neocclassicals are blind
to such that we can get this policy
right
>> we could for example provide so for for
the for the smaller landlords the ones
or the less m or the you the ones who
are they don't have enough cash to fix
the leaks you know upkeep the building
that they could be given tax credits.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So that compensation for the rent
control would be that okay if you're a
large real estate corporation and you've
got lots of cash flows then clearly you
do have the cash flow to to deal with
the problems. But you if you're a
smaller landlord then you could be given
some kind of a tax credit. You could be
given some kind of public subsidy that
could deal with that kind of an issue
which you brings you straight back to
the question of the public financing of
all of this. Right? So that's the way at
least I would tentatively think about
the issue.
>> Since we've been talking about politics
for basically this entire discussion, I
want to talk about political realities
for right now. What are the constraints
that have prevented this kind of
heterodox policy from becoming the norm
in a place like America?
>> Well, that's a great question and I
think I think the issue is that these
kinds of ideas are not in the public
domain.
And so whenever you use the word
economics, let's say it comes up, let's
say who are the experts who come say
let's say to CNN, they're already coming
implicitly even if they don't say it
from this idea that markets are sort of
prime and then everything else follows
afterwards. So I mean in order to push
back against that you need to have more
conversations about the discip.
>> Thank you for that. Thank you. I think
that these kinds of conversations are
helpful because at least it opens up the
space for thinking about that well I
mean okay so when you're talking about
foundational questions like the market
economy what exactly do you mean by that
and you know so those are the kinds of
questions I think so come backing coming
back to your question that's an
impediment because if you're going to
say that well I want to make some aspect
of social services u I don't know
affordable or something then you'll
always come up to this impediment that
well are you a state interventionist
whereas this is the free market and
that's the lingua frana
and that's the hard part of it that to
say that well okay to push the
conversation farther as opposed to
saying well okay you know if you think
of markets in different ways then it may
be hard to make the change but at least
the market is not pre-political so for
me that's the problem
>> what's the basic gist of why Europe and
the US from the historian perspective
sort of went different directions and
obviously the democratic socialist the
democratic socialist tradition obviously
much more robust in Europe. I mean it's
never really
>> you know it doesn't have as nearly as
much history in the US etc. Union's much
more robust throughout Europe. How did
that what like generally speaking except
for maybe like a couple decades partly
it just there's never any sort of like
socialist tradition ever really took
root in the US. I'm curious.
>> So first of all we do have a long
history of municipal socialism called su
socialism in this country. I mean so
there's you know of so you know in other
words I you know there a lot has been
written actually that what Mandani is
doing here. It's actually pretty there's
a long his history behind that. Gale
Radford has written about this a
historian. I think the the issue is and
so so that's the first point. The second
point is that uh if you look at and this
comes back I think uh Tracy to your
question which is that in the public
discourse
we don't know there's a kind of an idea
that the New Deal was an outlier.
>> Yeah. And therefore we need to basically
go back to some pre-new deal
romanticized small government. You know
Steve Bannon makes this kind that's why
the attack against the administrative
state is premised on this. The problem
is the many legal historians and legal
economic historians have pointed out
this is not true that the US developed a
very robust
developmental state in the
reconstruction period. So there's a
really a lot of history there that is
not part of the public domain and the
and the discourse on economics because
the teaching of economics does not
require students to actually
require not as an elective but require
them to actually read economic history
in most places in their training. So
they don't know the history and so this
new notion of the market prevails and
then they don't they don't know their
own history. I don't think that's any
different in Europe and we can talk
about that but there are interesting
issues here. So for example the American
historically the American taxation
system was much more progressive than in
Europe.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So there is that. But I think
what happens in the post war period,
postcond world war period is that
that kind of sent a jolt for a lot of
people and I think that kind of revived
the left in some sense because fascism
and there was a clear understanding that
massive inequality
was you know is one of the one of the
ingredients of the rise of fascist
movements in the 1920s and 30s. And so
reducing inequality, embedding social
and economic rights and constitutions,
I'm thinking here with the German
constitution, super important as a kind
of insulation at least to some extent
against a repetition of those horrors.
So this created a kind of a different
social model based on these progressive
constitutions. We haven't had that. Our
constitution
>> is a first generation constitution and
in that way there are no explicit
commitments to economic and social
rights. Human dignity the expression I
don't think appears in the US
constitution. It does appear in a lot of
these European constitutions and that
matters. You have the rights of
personhood
right the 14th amendment but you know
that you know very well that how that's
been weaponized for corporate personhood
and so on. That's I think part of the
story as to why the welfare state has
been somewhat more robust. Though it's
also seen fractures in Europe than here
where that has not been the case. We
we're still stuck with this a
constitution which at least in my view
is not a very good constitution.
>> I wasn't expecting constitutional
analysis to come into this conversation
but I think it does illustrate your
point about the intertwining of politics
and the economy. Can I ask one more
thing and maybe it doesn't even make
sense or fit into this conversation but
when I think about lassair
markets or economics there seems to be
an emphasis on absolute gains so
positive sum outcomes where it you know
two countries start trading with each
other guns and butter whatever both the
countries are better off it doesn't
matter how much better off they are
relative to each other.
>> When we think about heterodox economics
and the importance of politics, are we
basically saying that every policy
decision the emphasis is much more on
relative gains versus absolute gains?
>> I'm not aware of that, Tracy. At least
not from my standpoint. I I I I do think
that markets and the sort of private
initiatives in markets that does
generate wealth. I mean that you go back
to Smith, he says that. So in that sense
it's true that market activity does
generate enormous social wealth. Yes it
does. But what people tend to forget is
that there's also a flip side to that
the social costs. And so we have to then
think about okay can we somehow do we
reduce some of those social costs in
terms of affordability or pollution or
climate crisis. That's I think saying
that okay markets are great but what are
they sort of embedded on that that
infrastructure that I was talking about
that is sort of leading to massive
emissions of greenhouse gases. I mean
that's clearly unsustainable and we all
know that. Uh so I feel like I I don't
know that I would necessarily think
about it in terms of positive or
negative sum gains. I would just say
that market activity does generate
enormous social wealth but also enormous
social costs and so then that's where I
think the conversation has to go to how
to reduce our social costs.
>> Jami Modud thank you so much for it's
really fascinating conversation
appreciate your time.
>> Okay.
[music]
Tracy, we should do more intellectual
history episodes. I really like that
topic. I don't know. Like
>> I think I'm still scarred from doing
international relations at college and
whenever someone talks about
intellectual histories of particular
theories, I kind of I get nervous. I
think let's just make the whole I I'd be
down to make the whole podcast that. No,
I do think this is like really
interesting. Look, I think this is a
very timely conversation because one
thing, you know, he mentioned Bannon
there at the end. One thing that I feel
is that regardless of where many people
are on the political spectrum these
days, there seems to be a deep
intuition that many people have about
the corrosive effects of society on
inequal or the corrosive effects of
inequality on society. And I thought
your question was really good which is
like many people economists could say
like look you're better off too in this
relationship you Uber driver like maybe
you feel that you're uh maybe people
find it to not be great work but the
alternative is nothing or whatever
>> you're not a billionaire but at least
you're employed
>> you're employed right and this is
something and a lot of people say look
everyone is on paper or maybe even in
reality better off from this set of
transactions right but then it
aggregates up to something that I think
people find to be very destabilizing.
>> Right? So intuitively a lot of people
seem unhappy with their current
situation.
>> So the transaction makes everyone
happier in the micro sense. But then
when everyone when it all scales out
this sort of like deep inequality, who
has the means to create, who has the
ability to like actually do something,
who is just u sort of who is not in that
position? I think it feels very again
destabilizing. Yeah, I do think I mean
to Jami's point like it it does feel
like so much of it just boils down to
politics, right?
>> Yeah. Right.
>> Like the economy itself
to go back to how we began this
conversation did not spring forth from
the universe. It was it's a human
construction and we put a lot of thought
and effort into how it actually works
>> and that's a political that that's a
political reality.
>> Yeah. And like you know we could talk
all this stuff and like the contrast
with Chinese uh industrial policy I
think is very helpful for two reasons.
One is okay you could look at it at
various things and say well this is
actually very effective and there was a
role for the public sector and so forth
but if like we're all at each other's
throats right then you're never going to
have any like hope of like
operationalizing these ideas. And this
is why I've said this before like I feel
like there are certain societal problems
that truly like precede economics. The
the toolkit does not entirely exist in
economics to solve problems that on
paper look economic
>> right this I think is important because
in the neocclassical perspective so
everything springs from the economy and
the the focus is on the economy
>> itself.
Meanwhile, as a society, you know, you
might want to prioritize different
outcomes. Like maybe we should all be
happy. I, you know, I would like to
prioritize everyone's happiness. And to
your point, like if we're all focused on
relative gains, if free market
capitalism is increasing inequality,
then that might not necessarily do that.
>> We should prioritize everyone getting
off their devices and reading, and then
I think we'll have a
>> touch grass.
>> We'll have better outcomes. Yeah.
>> Uh, we're getting dangerously close to
like talking about Bhutan and national
>> we got to debunk. I' I've read some
pretty
>> Yeah, I know. I know. That's why we we
should stop. Shall we leave it there?
>> Yeah, let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Dash
Bennett at Dashbot and Kellbrooks at
Kellbrooks. And for more OddLotss
content, go to bloomberg.com/odlotss.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss. [music]
>> And if you enjoy all thoughts, if you
want us to do more episodes on the
intellectual history of economics, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast [music] platform.
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely [music] adree. All
you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions [music] there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]